DOCS-4026 APM Tutorials - python (#16069)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/guide/tutorial-enable-python-containers.md

---
title: Tutorial - Enabling Tracing for a Python Application and Datadog Agent in Containers
kind: guide
further_reading:
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/library_config/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Additional tracing library configuration options
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/dd_libraries/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Detailed tracing library setup instructions
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/compatibility/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Supported Python frameworks for automatic instrumentation
- link: /tracing/trace_collection/custom_instrumentation/python/
  tags: Documentation
  text: Manually configuring traces and spans
- link: https://github.com/DataDog/dd-trace-py
  tags: GitHub
  text: Tracing library open source code repository
---

## Overview

> This tutorial walks you through step by step enabling tracing on a sample Python application that is installed in a container. In this scenario, the Datadog Agent is also installed in a container. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial walks you through the steps for enabling tracing on a sample Python application installed in a container. In this scenario, the Datadog Agent is also installed in a container. 
```

> For other scenarios, including application and Agent on a host, the application in a container and Agent on a host, and applications written in other languages, see the other [Enabling Tracing tutorials][1].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For other scenarios, including the application and Agent on a host, the application in a container and Agent on a host, and applications written in other languages, see the other [Enabling Tracing tutorials][1].
```

> For general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Python, see [Tracing Python Applications][2].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Tracing Python Applications][2] for general comprehensive tracing setup documentation for Python.
```

Reviewer: oops, I forgot that you told me not to repeat feedback. I'll just say "same as above" now

   ```

4. Add Docker labels that correspond to the Universal Service Tags. This allows you to also get Docker metrics once your application is running. 

   ```
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.service="notes"
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.env="dev"
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.version="0.1.0"
   ```

To check that you've set things up correctly, compare your Dockerfile file with the one provided in the sample repository's solution file, `docker/containers/solution/Dockerfile.notes`.

## Add the Agent container

Add the Datadog Agent in the services section of your `docker-compose.yaml` file:

1. Add the Agent configuration, and specify your own [Datadog API key][3] and [site][6]:
   ```yaml
     datadog:
       container_name: dd-agent
       image: "gcr.io/datadoghq/agent:latest"
       environment:
          - DD_API_KEY=<DD_API_KEY>
          - DD_SITE=datadoghq.com  # Default. Change to eu.datadoghq.com, us3.datadoghq.com, us5.datadoghq.com as appropriate for your org
          - DD_APM_ENABLED=true    # Enable APM
       volumes: 
          - /var/run/docker.sock:/var/run/docker.sock:ro 
          - /proc/:/host/proc/:ro
          - /sys/fs/cgroup/:/host/sys/fs/cgroup:ro
   ```

> 2. To the section for each container with code that you want to monitor, in this case the `notes_app` container, add the environment variable `DD_AGENT_HOST` and specify the hostname of the Agent container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the environment variable `DD_AGENT_HOST` and specify the hostname of the Agent container to the section for each container with code that you want to monitor, in this case, the `notes_app` container:
```

```

You can tell the Agent is working by observing continuous output in the terminal, or by opening the [Events Explorer][8] in Datadog and seeing the start event for the Agent:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-container-agent-start-event.png" alt="Agent start event shown in Events Explorer" style="width:100%;" >}}

With the application running, send some curl requests to it:

`curl -X POST 'localhost:8080/notes?desc=hello'`
: `(1, hello)`

`curl -X GET 'localhost:8080/notes?id=1'`
: `(1, hello)`

`curl -X PUT 'localhost:8080/notes?id=1&desc=UpdatedNote'`
: `(1, UpdatedNote)`

`curl -X DELETE 'localhost:8080/notes?id=1'`
: `Deleted`

Wait a few moments, and go to [**APM > Traces**][11] in Datadog, where you can see a list of traces corresponding to your API calls:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-container-traces.png" alt="Traces from the sample app in APM Trace Explorer" style="width:100%;" >}}

If you don't see traces after several minutes, clear any filter in the Traces Search field (sometimes it filters on an environment variable such as `ENV` that you aren't using).

### Examine a trace

> In the Traces page, click on a `POST /notes` trace to see a flame graph that shows how long each span took and what other spans occurred before a span completed. The bar at the top of the graph is the span you selected on the previous screen (in this case, the initial entry point into our notes application). 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
On the Traces page, click on a `POST /notes` trace to see a flame graph that shows how long each span took and what other spans occurred before a span completed. The bar at the top of the graph is the span you selected on the previous screen (in this case, the initial entry point into our notes application). 
```

A `GET /notes` trace looks something like this:

{{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-container-get-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a GET trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

## Add custom instrumentation to the Python application

While automatic instrumentation is convenient, sometimes you want more fine-grained spans. Datadog's Python DD Trace API allows you to specify spans within your code using annotations or code.

The following steps walk you through adding annotations to the code to trace some sample methods.

1. Open `notes_app/notes_helper.py`.
2. Add the following import:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}
from ddtrace import tracer{{< /code-block >}}

3. Inside the `NotesHelper` class, add a tracer wrapper called `notes_helper` to better see how the `notes_helper.long_running_process` method works:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}class NotesHelper:

    @tracer.wrap(service="notes_helper")
    def long_running_process(self):
        time.sleep(.3)
        logging.info("Hello from the long running process")
        self.__private_method_1(){{< /code-block >}}

>     Now, the tracer automatically labels the resource with the function name it is wrapped around, in this case `long_running_process`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    Now, the tracer automatically labels the resource with the function name it is wrapped around, in this case, `long_running_process`.
```

4. Rebuild the containers by running:
   {{< code-block lang="sh" >}}
docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml build notes_app
docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml up db datadog notes_app
{{< /code-block >}}
4. Resend some HTTP requests, specifically some `GET` requests.
5. On the Trace Explorer, click into one of the new `GET` requests, and see a flame graph like this:

   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-container-custom-flame.png" alt="A flame graph for a GET trace with custom instrumentation." style="width:100%;" >}}
   
   Note the higher level of detail in the stack trace now that the `get_notes` function has custom tracing.

For more information, read [Custom Instrumentation][12].

## Add a second application to see distributed traces

> Tracing a single application is a great start, but the real value in tracing comes when you can see how requests are flowing through your services. This is called _distributed tracing_. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tracing a single application is a great start, but the real value in tracing is seeing how requests flow through your services. This is called _distributed tracing_. 
```

The sample project includes a second application called `calendar_app` that returns a random date whenever it is invoked. The `POST` endpoint in the Notes application has a second query parameter named `add_date`. When it is set to `y`, Notes calls the calendar application to get a date to add to the note.

1. Configure the calendar app for tracing by adding `dd_trace` to the startup command in the Dockerfile, like you previously did for the notes app. Open `docker/containers/exercise/Dockerfile.calendar` and update the CMD line like this:
   ```
   CMD ["ddtrace-run", "python", "-m", "calendar_app.app"] 
   ```

3. Apply Universal Service Tags, just like we did for the notes app. Add the following environment variables in the `Dockerfile.calendar` file:

   ```
   ENV DD_SERVICE="calendar"
   ENV DD_ENV="dev"
   ENV DD_VERSION="0.1.0"
   ```

> 4. And again, add Docker labels that correspond to the Universal Service Tags, allowing you to also get Docker metrics once your application is running. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Again, add Docker labels that correspond to the Universal Service Tags, allowing you to also get Docker metrics once your application runs. 
```

   ```
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.service="calendar"
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.env="dev"
   LABEL com.datadoghq.tags.version="0.1.0"
   ```

> 2. Add the Agent container hostname, `DD_AGENT_HOST`, to the calendar application container so that it sends traces to the correct location. Open `docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml` and add the following lines to the `calendar_app` section:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Add the Agent container hostname, `DD_AGENT_HOST`, to the calendar application container to send traces to the correct location. Open `docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml` and add the following lines to the `calendar_app` section:
```

   ```yaml
       environment:
        - DD_AGENT_HOST=datadog
   ```

   To check that you've set things up correctly, compare your setup with the Dockerfile and `docker-config.yaml` files provided in the sample repository's `docker/containers/solution` directory.

> 5. Build the multi-service application by restarting the containers. First, stop all containers if still running:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Build the multi-service application by restarting the containers. First, stop all running containers:
```

   ```
   docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml down
   ```

   Then run the following commands to start them:
   ```
   docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml build
   docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml up
   ```

6. Send a POST request with the `add_date` parameter:

`curl -X POST 'localhost:8080/notes?desc=hello_again&add_date=y'`
: `(2, hello_again with date 2022-11-06)`

7. In the Trace Explorer, click this latest trace to see a distributed trace between the two services:

   {{< img src="tracing/guide/tutorials/tutorial-python-container-distributed.png" alt="A flame graph for a distributed trace." style="width:100%;" >}}

## Add more custom instrumentation

> As previously mentioned, you can add custom instrumentation by using code. Supposed you want to further instrument the calendar service in order to better see the trace. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You can add custom instrumentation by using code. Suppose you want to further instrument the calendar service to better see the trace:
```

   ```python
   with tracer.trace(name="notes_helper", service="notes_helper", resource="another_process") as span:
   ```
   Resulting in this:
   {{< code-block lang="python" >}}
def create_note(self, desc, add_date=None):
        if (add_date):
            if (add_date.lower() == "y"):
                try:
                    with tracer.trace(name="notes_helper", service="notes_helper", resource="another_process") as span:
                        self.nh.another_process()
                    note_date = requests.get(f"http://localhost:9090/calendar")
                    note_date = note_date.text
                    desc = desc + " with date " + note_date
                    print(desc)
                except Exception as e:
                    print(e)
                    raise IOError("Cannot reach calendar service.")
        note = Note(description=desc, id=None)
        note.id = self.db.create_note(note){{< /code-block >}}

4. Rebuild the containers:
   ```
   docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml build notes_app
   docker-compose -f docker/containers/exercise/docker-compose.yaml up
   ```

> 5. Send some more HTTP requests, specifically `POST` requests with the `add_date` argument.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Send some more HTTP requests, specifically `POST` requests, with the `add_date` argument.
```
